 5.2.2 The Distance-Vector (DV) Routing Algorithm
 Whereas the LS algorithm is an algorithm using global information, the distance
vector (DV) algorithm is iterative, asynchronous, and distributed. It is distributed in 
that each node receives some information from one or more of its directly attached 
neighbors, performs a calculation, and then distributes the results of its calculation 
back to its neighbors. It is iterative in that this process continues on until no more 
information is exchanged between neighbors. (Interestingly, the algorithm is also 
self-terminating〞there is no signal that the computation should stop; it just stops.) 
The algorithm is asynchronous in that it does not require all of the nodes to operate in 
lockstep with each other. We＊ll see that an asynchronous, iterative, self-terminating, 
distributed algorithm is much more interesting and fun than a centralized algorithm!
 Before we present the DV algorithm, it will prove beneficial to discuss an impor
tant relationship that exists among the costs of the least-cost paths. Let dx(y) be the 
cost of the least-cost path from node x to node y. Then the least costs are related by 
the celebrated Bellman-Ford equation, namely,
 dx(y) = minv5c(x, v) + dv( y)6,
 (5.1)
 where the minv in the equation is taken over all of x＊s neighbors. The Bellman
Ford equation is rather intuitive. Indeed, after traveling from x to v, if we then take 
the least-cost path from v to y, the path cost will be c(x, v) + dv(y). Since we must 
begin by traveling to some neighbor v, the least cost from x to y is the minimum of 
c(x, v) + dv(y) taken over all neighbors v.
 But for those who might be skeptical about the validity of the equation, let＊s 
check it for source node u and destination node z in Figure 5.3. The source node u 
has three neighbors: nodes v, x, and w. By walking along various paths in the graph, 
it is easy to see that dv(z) = 5, dx(z) = 3, and dw(z) = 3. Plugging these values into 
Equation 5.1, along with the costs c(u, v) = 2, c(u, x) = 1, and c(u, w) = 5, gives 
du(z) = min52 + 5, 5 + 3, 1 + 36 = 4, which is obviously true and which is 
exactly what the Dijskstra algorithm gave us for the same network. This quick veri
fication should help relieve any skepticism you may have.
 The Bellman-Ford equation is not just an intellectual curiosity. It actually has signif
icant practical importance: the solution to the Bellman-Ford equation provides the entries 
in node x＊s forwarding table. To see this, let v* be any neighboring node that achieves 
the minimum in Equation 5.1. Then, if node x wants to send a packet to node y along a 
least-cost path, it should first forward the packet to node v*. Thus, node x＊s forwarding 
table would specify node v* as the next-hop router for the ultimate destination y. Another 
important practical contribution of the Bellman-Ford equation is that it suggests the form 
of the neighbor-to-neighbor communication that will take place in the DV algorithm.
 The basic idea is as follows. Each node x begins with Dx(y), an estimate of the cost 
of the least-cost path from itself to node y, for all nodes, y, in N. Let Dx = [Dx(y): y in N] 
be node x＊s distance vector, which is the vector of cost estimates from x to all other nodes, 
y, in N. With the DV algorithm, each node x maintains the following routing information:
 ? For each neighbor v, the cost c(x,v) from x to directly attached neighbor, v
 ? Node x＊s distance vector, that is, Dx=[Dx(y): y in N], containing x＊s estimate of 
its cost to all destinations, y, in N
 ? The distance vectors of each of its neighbors, that is, Dv=[Dv(y): y in N] for 
each neighbor v of x
 In the distributed, asynchronous algorithm, from time to time, each node sends a 
copy of its distance vector to each of its neighbors. When a node x receives a new 
distance vector from any of its neighbors w, it saves w＊s distance vector, and then 
uses the Bellman-Ford equation to update its own distance vector as follows:
 Dx(y)=minv5c(x, v)+Dv(y)6 for each node y in N
 If node x＊s distance vector has changed as a result of this update step, node x will then 
send its updated distance vector to each of its neighbors, which can in turn update 
their own distance vectors. Miraculously enough, as long as all the nodes continue 
to exchange their distance vectors in an asynchronous fashion, each cost estimate 
Dx(y) converges to dx(y), the actual cost of the least-cost path from node x to node y 
[Bertsekas 1991]!
 Distance-Vector (DV) Algorithm
 At each node, x:
 1  Initialization:
 2    for all destinations y in N:
 3       Dx(y)= c(x,y)/* if y is not a neighbor then c(x,y)= ﹢ */
 4    for each neighbor w
 5       Dw(y) = ? for all destinations y in N
 6    for each neighbor w
 7       send distance vector  Dx = [Dx(y): y in N] to w
 8
 9  loop 
10    wait  (until I see a link cost change to some neighbor w or
 11            until I receive a distance vector from some neighbor w)
 12
 13    for each y in N:
 14        Dx(y) = minv{c(x,v) + Dv(y)}
 15
 16 if Dx(y) changed for any destination y
 17       send distance vector Dx  = [Dx(y): y in N] to all neighbors
 18
 19 forever 
 In the DV algorithm, a node x updates its distance-vector estimate when it either 
sees a cost change in one of its directly attached links or receives a distance-vector 
update from some neighbor. But to update its own forwarding table for a given des
tination y, what node x really needs to know is not the shortest-path distance to y but 
instead the neighboring node v*(y) that is the next-hop router along the shortest path 
to y. As you might expect, the next-hop router v*(y) is the neighbor v that achieves 
the minimum in Line 14 of the DV algorithm. (If there are multiple neighbors v that 
achieve the minimum, then v*(y) can be any of the minimizing neighbors.) Thus, 
in Lines 13每14, for each destination y, node x also determines v*(y) and updates its 
forwarding table for destination y.
 Recall that the LS algorithm is a centralized algorithm in the sense that it 
requires each node to first obtain a complete map of the network before running the 
Dijkstra algorithm. The DV algorithm is decentralized and does not use such global 
information. Indeed, the only information a node will have is the costs of the links 
to its directly attached neighbors and information it receives from these neighbors. 
Each node waits for an update from any neighbor (Lines 10每11), calculates its new 
distance vector when receiving an update (Line 14), and distributes its new distance 
vector to its neighbors (Lines 16每17). DV-like algorithms are used in many routing 
protocols in practice, including the Internet＊s RIP and BGP, ISO IDRP, Novell IPX, 
and the original ARPAnet.
 Figure 5.6 illustrates the operation of the DV algorithm for the simple three
node network shown at the top of the figure. The operation of the algorithm is illus
trated in a synchronous manner, where all nodes simultaneously receive distance 
vectors from their neighbors, compute their new distance vectors, and inform their 
neighbors if their distance vectors have changed. After studying this example, you 
should convince yourself that the algorithm operates correctly in an asynchronous 
manner as well, with node computations and update generation/reception occurring 
at any time.
 The leftmost column of the figure displays three initial routing tables for each 
of the three nodes. For example, the table in the upper-left corner is node x＊s ini
tial routing table. Within a specific routing table, each row is a distance vector〞 
specifically, each node＊s routing table includes its own distance vector and that 
of each of its neighbors. Thus, the first row in node x＊s initial routing table is 
Dx = [Dx(x), Dx(y), Dx(z)] = [0, 2, 7]. The second and third rows in this table are 
the most recently received distance vectors from nodes y and z, respectively. Because 
at initialization node x has not received anything from node y or z, the entries in  
the second and third rows are initialized to infinity.
 After initialization, each node sends its distance vector to each of its two neigh
bors. This is illustrated in Figure 5.6 by the arrows from the first column of tables 
to the second column of tables. For example, node x sends its distance vector Dx = 
[0, 2, 7] to both nodes y and z. After receiving the updates, each node recomputes its 
own distance vector. For example, node x computes
 Dx(x)=0
 Dx(y)=min5c(x,y)+Dy(y), c(x,z)+Dz(y)6=min52+0, 7+16=2
 Dx(z)=min5c(x,y)+Dy(z), c(x,z)+Dz(z)6=min52+1, 7+06=3
 The second column therefore displays, for each node, the node＊s new distance vector 
along with distance vectors just received from its neighbors. Note, for example, that 
 node x＊s estimate for the least cost to node z, Dx(z), has changed from 7 to 3. Also 
note that for node x, neighboring node y achieves the minimum in line 14 of the DV 
algorithm; thus at this stage of the algorithm, we have at node x that v*(y) = y and 
v*(z) = y.
 After the nodes recompute their distance vectors, they again send their updated 
distance vectors to their neighbors (if there has been a change). This is illustrated in 
Figure 5.6 by the arrows from the second column of tables to the third column of 
tables. Note that only nodes x and z send updates: node y＊s distance vector didn＊t 
change so node y doesn＊t send an update. After receiving the updates, the nodes then 
recompute their distance vectors and update their routing tables, which are shown in 
the third column.
 The process of receiving updated distance vectors from neighbors, recomputing 
routing table entries, and informing neighbors of changed costs of the least-cost path 
to a destination continues until no update messages are sent. At this point, since no 
update messages are sent, no further routing table calculations will occur and the 
algorithm will enter a quiescent state; that is, all nodes will be performing the wait in 
Lines 10每11 of the DV algorithm. The algorithm remains in the quiescent state until 
a link cost changes, as discussed next.
 Distance-Vector Algorithm: Link-Cost Changes and Link Failure
 When a node running the DV algorithm detects a change in the link cost from 
itself to a neighbor (Lines 10每11), it updates its distance vector (Lines 13每14) and, 
if there＊s a change in the cost of the least-cost path, informs its neighbors (Lines 
16每17) of its new distance vector. Figure 5.7(a) illustrates a scenario where the link 
cost from y to x changes from 4 to 1. We focus here only on y＊ and z＊s distance table 
entries to destination x. The DV algorithm causes the following sequence of events 
to occur:
 ? At time t0, y detects the link-cost change (the cost has changed from 4 to 1), 
updates its distance vector, and informs its neighbors of this change since its dis
tance vector has changed.
 ? At time t1, z receives the update from y and updates its table. It computes a new 
least cost to x (it has decreased from a cost of 5 to a cost of 2) and sends its new 
distance vector to its neighbors.
 ? At time t2, y receives z＊s update and updates its distance table. y＊s least costs do 
not change and hence y does not send any message to z. The algorithm comes to 
a quiescent state.
 Thus, only two iterations are required for the DV algorithm to reach a quiescent  
state. The good news about the decreased cost between x and y has propagated 
quickly through the network.
 Let＊s now consider what can happen when a link cost increases. Suppose that 
the link cost between x and y increases from 4 to 60, as shown in Figure 5.7(b).
 1. Before the link cost changes, Dy(x) = 4, Dy(z) = 1, Dz(y) = 1, and Dz(x) = 5. 
At time t0, y detects the link-cost change (the cost has changed from 4 to 60). y 
computes its new minimum-cost path to x to have a cost of
 Dy(x) = min5c(y,x) + Dx(x), c(y,z) + Dz(x)6 = min560 + 0, 1 + 56 = 6
 Of course, with our global view of the network, we can see that this new cost via 
z is wrong. But the only information node y has is that its direct cost to x is 60 
and that z has last told y that z could get to x with a cost of 5. So in order to get 
to x, y would now route through z, fully expecting that z will be able to get to x 
with a cost of 5. As of t1 we have a routing loop〞in order to get to x, y routes 
through z, and z routes through y. A routing loop is like a black hole〞a packet 
destined for x arriving at y or z as of t1 will bounce back and forth between these 
two nodes forever (or until the forwarding tables are changed).
 2. 
Since node y has computed a new minimum cost to x, it informs z of its new 
distance vector at time t1.
 3. Sometime after t1, z receives y＊s new distance vector, which indicates that y＊s 
minimum cost to x is 6. z knows it can get to y with a cost of 1 and hence com
putes a new least cost to x of Dz(x) = min550 + 0,1 + 66 = 7. Since z＊s 
least cost to x has increased, it then informs y of its new distance vector at t2.
 4. In a similar manner, after receiving z＊s new distance vector, y determines 
Dy(x) = 8 and sends z its distance vector. z then determines Dz(x) = 9 and 
sends y its distance vector, and so on.
 How long will the process continue? You should convince yourself that the loop will 
persist for 44 iterations (message exchanges between y and z)〞until z eventually 
computes the cost of its path via y to be greater than 50. At this point, z will (finally!) 
determine that its least-cost path to x is via its direct connection to x. y will then 
 route to x via z. The result of the bad news about the increase in link cost has indeed  
traveled slowly! What would have happened if the link cost c(y, x) had changed from 
4 to 10,000 and the cost c(z, x) had been 9,999? Because of such scenarios, the prob
lem we have seen is sometimes referred to as the count-to-infinity  problem.
 Distance-Vector Algorithm: Adding Poisoned Reverse
 The specific looping scenario just described can be avoided using a technique known 
as poisoned reverse. The idea is simple〞if z routes through y to get to destination x, 
then z will advertise to y that its distance to x is infinity, that is, z will advertise to y 
that Dz(x) = ﹢ (even though z knows Dz(x) = 5 in truth). z will continue telling this 
little white lie to y as long as it routes to x via y. Since y believes that z has no path 
to x, y will never attempt to route to x via z, as long as z continues to route to x via y 
(and lies about doing so).
 Let＊s now see how poisoned reverse solves the particular looping problem we 
encountered before in Figure 5.5(b). As a result of the poisoned reverse, y＊s distance 
table indicates Dz(x) = ﹢. When the cost of the (x, y) link changes from 4 to 60 at 
time t0, y updates its table and continues to route directly to x, albeit at a higher cost 
of 60, and informs z of its new cost to x, that is, Dy(x) = 60. After receiving the 
update at t1, z immediately shifts its route to x to be via the direct (z, x) link at a cost 
of 50. Since this is a new least-cost path to x, and since the path no longer passes 
through y, z now informs y that Dz(x) = 50 at t2. After receiving the update from 
z, y updates its distance table with Dy(x) = 51. Also, since z is now on y＊s least
cost path to x, y poisons the reverse path from z to x by informing z at time t3 that 
Dy(x) = ﹢ (even though y knows that Dy(x) = 51 in truth).
 Does poisoned reverse solve the general count-to-infinity problem? It does not. 
You should convince yourself that loops involving three or more nodes (rather than 
simply two immediately neighboring nodes) will not be detected by the poisoned 
reverse technique.
 A Comparison of LS and DV Routing Algorithms
 The DV and LS algorithms take complementary approaches toward computing rout
ing. In the DV algorithm, each node talks to only its directly connected neighbors, 
but it provides its neighbors with least-cost estimates from itself to all the nodes 
(that it knows about) in the network. The LS algorithm requires global information. 
Consequently, when implemented in each and every router, e.g., as in Figure 4.2 and 
5.1, each node would need to communicate with all other nodes (via broadcast), but 
it tells them only the costs of its directly connected links. Let＊s conclude our study 
of LS and DV algorithms with a quick comparison of some of their attributes. Recall 
that N is the set of nodes (routers) and E is the set of edges (links).
 ? Message complexity. We have seen that LS requires each node to know the cost 
of each link in the network. This requires O(|N| |E|) messages to be sent. Also, 
 whenever a link cost changes, the new link cost must be sent to all nodes. The DV 
algorithm requires message exchanges between directly connected neighbors at 
each iteration. We have seen that the time needed for the algorithm to converge 
can depend on many factors. When link costs change, the DV algorithm will 
propagate the results of the changed link cost only if the new link cost results in a 
changed least-cost path for one of the nodes attached to that link.
 ? Speed of convergence. We have seen that our implementation of LS is an O(|N|2) 
algorithm requiring O(|N| |E|)) messages. The DV algorithm can converge slowly 
and can have routing loops while the algorithm is converging. DV also suffers 
from the count-to-infinity problem.
 ? Robustness. What can happen if a router fails, misbehaves, or is sabotaged? 
Under LS, a router could broadcast an incorrect cost for one of its attached links 
(but no others). A node could also corrupt or drop any packets it received as part 
of an LS broadcast. But an LS node is computing only its own forwarding tables; 
other nodes are performing similar calculations for themselves. This means route 
calculations are somewhat separated under LS, providing a degree of robustness. 
Under DV, a node can advertise incorrect least-cost paths to any or all destina
tions. (Indeed, in 1997, a malfunctioning router in a small ISP provided national 
backbone routers with erroneous routing information. This caused other routers 
to flood the malfunctioning router with traffic and caused large portions of the 
Internet to become disconnected for up to several hours [Neumann 1997].) More 
generally, we note that, at each iteration, a node＊s calculation in DV is passed on 
to its neighbor and then indirectly to its neighbor＊s neighbor on the next iteration. 
In this sense, an incorrect node calculation can be diffused through the entire 
network under DV.
 In the end, neither algorithm is an obvious winner over the other; indeed, both algo
rithms are used in the Internet.